This article by Dr [Piotr Wozniak](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Piotr_Wozniak "Piotr Wozniak") is part of [SuperMemo Guru](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/SuperMemo_Guru "SuperMemo Guru") series on memory, learning, creativity, and problem solving.

## Victoria Dunckley

Dr Victoria Dunckley is a well-educated, smart, and beautiful lady. However, she is awfully wrong about digital media. She has already inflicted a great deal of harm on many households. Her way of modeling the brain should be a red flag warning for me. Could my models be similarly all wrong?

She started her erroneous path from a little model of how electronics turns off the frontal lobes via overstimulation. She then made it into a great theory, and then into a popular book. The nightmare scenario that she brings to my mind is how a super-smart brain can start with a minor misconception, a [falsity vector](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Falsity_vector "Falsity vector"), and over years, build it into a monument of harmful ignorance? Could this happen to me? It is my nightmare. The world is rich in new research that seems to fit a wide constellation of models. To confirm one's own brain theory, one needs to fish long enough to find some piece of data that would fit the model even if it were false. Could I keep twisting little pieces of knowledge to fit my own models, and go astray to some mad lawn? She is like me. She likes to name things precisely. This is why she came up with the preposterous "psychiatric" term: *" [Electronic Screen Syndrome](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/mental-wealth/201207/electronic-screen-syndrome-unrecognized-disorder) "*. Her reasoning is a mirror of the more catchy term *" [Digital Dementia](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Digital_Dementia "Digital Dementia") "* by professor [Manfred Spitzer](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Manfred_Spitzer "Manfred Spitzer"). Dunckley does not have the badge of Spitzer's professorial esteem, spiced up by a nice German accent, but she is young and nicely presentable for digital consumption via social media. This is how I found her. Not in serious literature, but via mom gossip on Facebook. Yes. I do read mom gossip on Facebook. That's part of my job.

## My overstimulation

If digital media is so bad for the brain, how do I survive so well immersed in it from morning to evening? I got most of my knowledge of Dunckley's theory from digital media. I generally [do not read books](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/I_do_not_read_books "I do not read books"), and I would not pay for a book I know is wrong and biased from the get-go. Did the news of Victoria's theory turn off my frontal lobes via overstimulation? If not, perhaps she can claim my brain is too old for that? She speaks a lot of the alleged immaturity of young brains, which allegedly increases their vulnerability.

Upon some self-analysis, I will actually have to agree with Dunckley in part. My frontal lobes have been overwhelmed by activations from all over my brain in violent disagreement with Dunckley's "theories". I have to disagree, however, in that I am very happy with that "overstimulation", and would mourn taking any form of digital fast that would prevent this texts from being born. The disagreement with Dunckley is highly pleasurable. It is a form of high [activation](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Conceptual_computation "Conceptual computation"). It generates a great deal of intellectual side effects. My focus suffers. My creativity goes wild. My [ADHD](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/ADHD "ADHD") gets worse. However, all psychiatric diagnostics would have to suggest this is not a problem. I love all the side effects. I love to be addicted and overstimulated. That's the quintessence of progress. In disagreement, I find my best progress in improving my own models, or breaking some old ones, occasionally.

## Frontal lobes "shutdown"

At the center of Dunckley's "theory" is *"overstimulation"*, which leads to a *"shutdown"* of the frontal lobes. She also uses enigmatic terms *"malfunction"* or *"short circuit"*. This *"frontal lobe malfunction"* allegedly leads to a number of symptoms that mimic the whole array of mental disorders.

I might now take Dunckley "theory" and claim that schools have the exact same impact on the frontal lobes. On one hand, schooling often leads to [sleep deprivation](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Sleep_deprivation "Sleep deprivation"), on the other, changes in cortical activity are a norm during prolonged intellectual work. Whatever the original cause, there is one perfect remedy to similar problems: **get some sleep**. It is true that excitement may drive highly creative people to excessive abuse of their networks. They may work a bit too long in the night (mea culpa), or they may play those games for a bit too long. This may have some negative side effects for the function of the brain, but so does life. We do tend to use up our networks here and there to a degree. Aging is inevitable. However, it is the brain that might be the luckiest organ around. When used reasonably, it can actually keep adding knowledge and power through the decades. Even a [nonagenarian](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Nonagenarian "Nonagenarian") can stabilize at the very high level of intellectual performance. Gaming is no different than any other from of exciting intellectual work. It should be predominantly positive, and all the negatives can be easily handled with the right management (e.g. self-imposed evening curfew).

For details that contradict Dunckley see the indispensable [Peter Gray](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Peter_Gray "Peter Gray"): [Sense and nonsense of videogame addiction](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/freedom-learn/201803/sense-and-nonsense-about-video-game-addiction)

## "Overstimulation"

If overstimulation is central to Dunckley's thinking, it should be well defined. I wonder who defines how much stimulation is fine, and how much is too much. To my best knowledge, the best assessor of information on input is the child's brain. Whenever the brain detects the decline in the quality of the signal on input ([learntropy](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Learntropy "Learntropy")), it will seek new sources of knowledge. Interestingly, the brain aims at maximum [learntropy](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Learntropy "Learntropy"). In other words, it always act as if "the more the better". This is why computer games are so exciting. They provide top quality input. I see no way how this input could provide excessive knowledge. The brain will lower the bar only as a result of fatigue. After 30 min. of abstract algebra, the optimum may shift a peg down to reading a novel. However, the brain does all the calculations automatically. Could too much noise be a form of overstimulation? We naturally run away from noxious levels of sound. Could too much light be overstimulation? We have defenses against that too. Could rapid changes in the environment be overstimulation? No. If the brain cannot keep up, it will register lower [learntropy](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Learntropy "Learntropy") and may look for new environments with better knowledge input.

The whole idea of overstimulation seems to have been born from babies throwing tantrums and parents explaining tantrums with a sensory overwhelm. If healthy babies were free, the situation should never happen. When a baby gets fatigued, it takes a nap. The brain is defending itself naturally. However, if the same baby is forced to eat, or be sent to [daycare](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Daycare "Daycare"), or be transported by a car, or be played with by a loving auntie, the tantrum may be the right defense. To an untrained eye it may look like overstimulation. I doubt the thing exists.

The source of the term might also be the adults who suffer from migraines and know that the environment can cause unpleasant feelings. Or sensitive adults who may experience anxiety upon the buildup of microstress caused by a volley of environmental assaults. Someone might try to compare gaming to sensory overload. However, gaming is fun, sensory overload can be extremely unpleasant for affected individuals. Sufferers will not ask for more. They will run away.

If we speak of a healthy young brain, it will operate and adapt to any environment to maximize learning and productivity. That's the inherent power of the brain that we often destroy at school. What Dunckley proposes is to make things worse by adding conflict, [variable reward](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Variable_reward "Variable reward"), [knowledge deprivation](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Boredom "Boredom"), etc. It is the brain micro-management proposed by schools and by "theorists" like Dunckley that is the real culprit in depriving young brains from self-regulatory capacity in managing knowledge inflow (see: [Schools suppress the learn drive](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Schools_suppress_the_learn_drive "Schools suppress the learn drive")).

## Cocaine brain

An interesting propaganda trick used by the opponents of gaming is to compare the brain of a game addict to the brain of a cocaine addict. I have no doubt that when I emerge from cold water after an exhausting jogging on a sunny day, my brain looks little different from someone who just got a shot of heroin. Does it mean that jogging or cold water are bad? If I then drink cold beer, my brain might deserve instant incarceration on the grounds of suspect brain activity.

Proponents of digital deprivation need to point to the actual differences between the impact of happy gaming and the impact of happy reading on kids. My friend's daughter is 11 years old. She can read a 500-page books in 2-3 days. She devours books like a wood chipper. This book addiction is based on the same mechanisms as game addiction. The main difference is that no parent will ever complain of book reading unless it starts interfering with sleep or grades at school. At worst, the kid may hear *"pity it is only fiction"*. It is the same old myth of the harms of digital media that starts the chain of conflict in afflicted households.

## Chronic stress

In her characteristically lax neuro-pop-terminology, Dunckley refers to [chronic stress](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Chronic_stress "Chronic stress") saying that *"chronic stress effectively short circuits the frontal lobe"*, which leads to a *"hyperaroused and mentally depleted child"*, which, among many other side effects, has trouble *"following directions"*. She uses the concept of [chronic stress](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Chronic_stress "Chronic stress") when describing the effects of gaming. This can only be spoken by someone who never played a game herself. Games are fun, exhilarating, addictive, and jam-pack with [eustress](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Eustress "Eustress"). It is the parents and the school who generate all conflict that leads to [chronic stress](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Chronic_stress "Chronic stress") by imposing restrictions, and threats. It is the adult world that sees the games as the threat and responds with counter-threats. Dunckley refers to [this paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2907136) to form her "theory". However, she habitually confuses different forms of stress and their positive or negative impact on the cortex.

Naturally, the problem of stress may extend well beyond a computer game. I witnessed a major quarrel between best friends in a team game. The kids were playing a simulation of farming in Roblox. Probably, they got confused in resource ownership, accused each other of breach of trust, started a battle of trust and withdrawal of privileges and access options, and this was some kind of amazing social interaction catapulted via the digital setting in a simulation coming closer to the adult world. I would call it a great preparation to the stresses of the adult life. The game made it possible. In a playground, the kids would probably come to blows and settle the conflict by brute force. They might equally well never step into a conflict zone due to the relative simplicity of the playground world. However, while both parents of both kids are pretty open to gaming, they are not so open to playgrounds, which are often unjustly seen as dangerous places without adult supervision. Some parents let kids out for long hours and, and least in Poland, unhappy accidents are statistically insignificant. In large city playgrounds, there is always some ad hoc supervision from grannies and parents. In other words, when kids cannot meet without supervision on a playground, they can only do it in the game, and usually it is a great thing. This is a bit of adulthood tried out in childhood. [Chronic stress](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Chronic_stress "Chronic stress") is possible as it is always lurking around in modern social interaction (face-to-face or in virtual world). The electronics are not the culprit. Just an enabler. The problem is inherent in our psyche. It stems from game theory and the dynamics of social interaction.

## Sample bias

Dunckley works with children in trouble. This forms a sample bias. The fact that she reports 500 cases does not change the bias. My sample is smaller. I know dozens of gamers and they are all perfectly regulated. When they experience trouble, this is usually due to siblings, school, or parents. All trouble is easily explainable. Often the kids can explain it best. However, Dunckley claims her prescription generalizes well on the entire young population. In other words, she wants me to believe that parents who ban computers, tablets, and smartphones suddenly experience beautiful return to brain harmony in kids. This is the opposite of what I see. All restrictions on freedom, digital or otherwise, are always met with protests, alienation and the loss of authority on the part of the parent. Teens love to complain loud, and when they do, parental restrictions are often in the middle of their angry rants.

All Dunckley needs to get her position straight is to visit any normal household and ask around. As a psychiatrist, she may see a lot of imaginary trouble fit her theory. However, each individual is a true authority on her own life. If people are happy and productive with their own solutions, they need no psychiatrist tell them how to run their lives and how to find fulfillment.

If Dunckley was right, we should see an epidemic of [ADHD](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/ADHD "ADHD") or suicide in [democratic schools](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Democratic_school "Democratic school") or in radical [unschooling](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Unschooling "Unschooling") households. The opposite is true.

## Falsity vector

To understand her bias, I had to dig into a rich library of Victoria Dunckley at Psychology Today. I agree with a great deal of Dunckley's claims on mental health and I love the fact that she is not afraid to speak bluntly of overdiagnosis (e.g. of ADHD) and how it is driven by multiple forces of which only a fraction stems from the concern about the child. I sure prefer electronic fast over Ritalin.

I finally found Dunckley's [falsity vector](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Falsity_vector "Falsity vector"). She approves of authoritarian moms who believe in discipline. Her chief excuse is the "immaturity of the frontal lobes" in children up to the age of 25 or so. That "immaturity" is a fact if we look at the brain as a continually [conceptualizing](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Conceptualization "Conceptualization") device. The greater the freedom, the slower the [conceptualization](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Conceptualization "Conceptualization") process, the longer it takes, and the better the outcome. I am proud to admit that I was highly immature at the age of 25 on a number of counts. However, I am also sure that if Dunckley had put a parental yoke on me at younger ages, all my great ideas and love for people would have flown out through the window. My healthy [reactance](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Reactance "Reactance") was high, and it was a product of freedom. For this I am eternally grateful to my family.

Dunckley touts her "therapy" as helpful in achieving *"obedience and compliance"*. This is exactly what we should avoid, if we strive for autonomy and [intelligence](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Intelligence "Intelligence"). I believe that with her authoritarian thinking, "fully functioning frontal cortexes" will arrive faster indeed (see: [Stress reduces neurogenesis](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Stress_reduces_neurogenesis "Stress reduces neurogenesis")). However, these won't be cortices of Newton, or Einstein. These will be cortices ready for [Straight As in a medical school or in a law school](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Dangers_of_being_a_Straight_A_student "Dangers of being a Straight A student").

Here is a quote from Melanie Hempe on Dunckley's blog which hints at Dunckley's authoritarian feathers ([source](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/mental-wealth/201609/will-your-gamer-survive-college)):

> I chuckled when the student volunteers took the stage to offer their "wise advice" oh how parents should adjust to their student's newfound independence by not interfering with their freedom. According to them, our students should say, *"Mom and Dad, be there to pay the bills, but honestly, I am an adult now. My 18th birthday was last month, remember? You need to let me have my privacy, my independence and my beer"*. Well, while they may look like adults, this seasoned mom of four knows these "apprentice adults" will not have fully functioning frontal cortexes until they are, ironically, out of college. Will this scientific fact affect their college experience? Yes, it will. This is a lesson I learned with my oldest child. As I glanced across the packed auditorium at all those **naïve parents**, I wondered which ones would be picking up their gaming son prematurely this year to move him back home

Dunckley promotes a view in which, even in college, we are supposed not to let kids go free and make their own choices! No beer without the right GPA! I would not treat a 7 year old like she would treat a college student: *"Do not let him pack his game console"*! Would she be programming their life till the very last chance she got. If I was to guess, this would generate lifelong dependence and love based on some ingredients of Stockholm syndrome. Sadly, I know dozens of stories when authoritarian parenting turns into total alienation. These are very sad stories that I was never able to help to resolve. A daughter and a son who flatly refuses to call an aging mom or dad? Those are wounds that go so deep that I cannot even fully comprehend them.

## Depression

Dunckley often mentions depression and suicide as a result of the exposure to screens. She recommends that parents enforce strict rules such us "no electronics in the bedroom" or "digital curfew". When parents empathically defend child's rights, she is adamant:

> As long as you’re living in my house, you need to follow house rules. Period

This seemingly obvious right of the house owner ignores the fact no parent has a right to deliver a child into a house prison and keep it there for the first 18 years of life. Lack of freedom and personal space is far worse for suicide rates than screen time. The [picture of a child](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/mental-wealth/201711/is-your-child-overstimulated-too-much-screen-time) in Dunckley text is an emotional stunt. Take a look. Has the kid been hurt by a computer game? Or is he unhappy with the way his parents treat him? Is he upset with a computer or with a human being?

Social media may expose a teen to cyberbullying, however, the root cause of all that pathology is not electronics. The exact same problem of [bullying](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Bullying "Bullying") happens at school and still school survives by the myth that it serves good education. The main problem of the young generation that extends into adulthood is loss of control over their own lives. No despair is insurmountable as long as the brain can see options for a solution. For a kid locked in a authoritarian household, all options may seem dramatically bad: run away or kill myself.

Occasionally, parental pressure and Straight As can also result in unusual outcomes with a happy ending (sort of). A lovely example of high-IQ [reactance](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Reactance "Reactance") is [Asia Carrera](http://www.asiacarrera.com/bio2.html).

## Book sales

I never trust psychiatrists or pediatricians who make radical claims that please parental expectations, and who make money by selling the idea in the form of a book. Dunckley peppers some of her texts with dozens of links to her book on Amazon. Important warnings should go out for free to everyone. Hereby I warn of Dunckley's ideas for free! [I am not](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Piotr_Wozniak "Piotr Wozniak") selling books, which I hope adds to my credibility. Both Dunckley and [Manfred Spitzer](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Manfred_Spitzer "Manfred Spitzer") sell their ideas and capitalize on great demand from parents who want to impose their worldview and expectations on their children.

Both Dunckley and Spitzer have an uncanny ability to devour neuroscience news and twist all bits and pieces to fit their own narrative. This is the beauty of the creative brain to see options that nobody else can see. This is also the nightmare that Dunckley brings to my mind. Here by the grace of God come I. Each conversation with children and each scientific paper seem to fit my model of the brain. I seem to know exactly what we need to do to spawn happy genius minds. However, in the world of contradictory models, someone needs to be wrong. If Dunckley and Spitzer were to be right, I should promptly retire. I tell kids to enjoy all sources of knowledge and inspiration.

Victoria Dunckley got a hammer and all psychiatric symptoms can be nailed as *Electronic Screen Syndrome*. Her reasoning is outrageously wrong and harmful, and yet she is able to make a rich and convincing compilation of evidence that seems to persuade many a parent. This should be a warming for all obsessively theorizing brains. Human creativity can build models that are indistinguishable from fantasy.

## Psychiatric quackery

Many authors hypothesize about the epidemic increase in mental disorders in children in recent years ([ADHD](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/ADHD "ADHD"), suicide, [dyslexia](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Dyslexia "Dyslexia"), autism, etc.). Authors like Dunckley, Spitzer or Rowan would like to associate the epidemics with the arrival of digital media (e.g. game consoles, PCs, web, smartphones, etc.). Some authors even attempted to plot changes in mental disorder statistics against the arrival of individual technological breakthroughs (e.g. the smartphone in 2007). There are indeed powerful correlations. However, the opponents of new technologies see them as evil on their own, while I have an alternative explanation. If digital media provide new vistas for learning and exploring the world, the rift between traditional schooling and modern [free learning](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Free_learning "Free learning") will keep increasing. The rift will result in the end to compulsory schooling (see: [Compulsory schooling must end](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Compulsory_schooling_must_end "Compulsory schooling must end")). In the meantime, while the young generation [adapts](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Conceptualization "Conceptualization") to the new world, the old generation, blinded by their [cognitive biases](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Cognitive_bias "Cognitive bias"), attempts to stem the tidal wave. In their conservative effort to preserve the old world, the old thinking, and the old values, the adults become victims of a **false ally: a quack psychiatrist**.

Here is the tried-and-tested methodology used by a quack to extract money form the parent's pocket at the cost of a child's mental health:

- take an average child with access to electronic devices (i.e. most of the kids in the industrialized world)
- make parents nervous about the use of electronics by listing dozens of bad physiological and neurophysiological side effect
- spark household conflicts between anxious parents and children who crave access to the world of information
- initiate a feedback loop between parental anxiety, electronic restrictions, oppositional behavior, tantrums, and family conflict
- design a "electronic mental disease syndrome" with a catchy name (e.g. [Digital Dementia](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Digital_Dementia "Digital Dementia"), **Electronic Screen Syndrome**, Digital Brain Disorder, Internet Addiction, Gaming Disorder, Smartphone Attention Deficit, etc.)
- design diagnostic criteria, e.g. in the form of an easy to fill questionnaire
- make sure that all children affected by limits on freedom fit the diagnosis
- declare and epidemic
- write a book to earn money on global family distress generated by the new technology and its conflict with tradition and traditional schooling
- publish the questionnaire with a link to the book at Amazon.com (with a simple and sure solution)
- for maximum effect, adorn the text with a picture of an unhappy child who has just been stolen his beloved iPad. Most parents will recognize the face as eerily familiar

This is the other part of my nightmare from the title of this text. A psychiatrist can concoct a fake disease to earn money. He may be convinced of being right. He may have good intentions. But if there is profit in the equation, the mind may all-too-easily resolve all inconsistencies and contradictory data.

Have you ever robbed your child of his electronic device? If so, fill out [this questionnaire](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/mental-wealth/201711/is-your-child-overstimulated-too-much-screen-time) to see that your child now has a mental disease!

**Parents! Leave your kids alone!** Neither drugs nor quacks are a good prescription. Freedom to enjoy the [pleasure of learning](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Pleasure_of_learning "Pleasure of learning") is the best cure

## Tech bias

Dunkley is critical of tech companies:

> When tech corporations play to our emotions by selling the promise of individualized education adapting to each child’s specific needs, or of creating “readiness for succeeding in today’s world,” they create an atmosphere that makes us feel we can’t possibly survive without them. This is despite evidence that the majority of kids are hurt and not helped by tech in the classroom. Since when are evidenced-based methods of learning no longer the gold standard?

Technology can help or it can hurt. The hurt is usually a result of coercion because a heathy kid will quickly reject unworkable solutions as boring, tiring, or too complex. In contrast, few parents complain if kids get voluntarily immersed in [Khan Academy](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Khan_Academy "Khan Academy") or in [PhET simulations](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/PhET_simulations "PhET simulations"). These are the "books" of the 21st century. Corporate *"play on emotion"* has mythical powers. Corporations are allegedly highly knowledgeable in manipulation techniques. From my own field's view, I would say they are not (see: [Brain hacking](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Brain_hacking "Brain hacking")). For decades I have waited for a good simple alternative algorithm for [spaced repetition](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Spaced_repetition "Spaced repetition"). Computing intervals in learning is far easier than "brain manipulation". Classroom learning is inefficient, and this is not due to the help from tech companies or lack thereof (see: [Inherent problems of classroom learning](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Inherent_problems_of_classroom_learning "Inherent problems of classroom learning")). Last but not least, "educators" love to call up "evidence-based" approach, while they keep ignoring the best evidence: happy faces of kids involved in learning.

Good learning can be digital or it can be natural. The ultimate quality judge is the child

## Cruel deprivation

Dunckley quotes a sad case of two little boys deprived of their iPads as a result of Dunckley's book. The case study is used as a confirmation that a household can return to normal life and thrive without electronics. I see it differently. All healthy kids will thrive in all loving households and will adapt easily to lives with digital devices or to lives without them. When kids show happy behaviors typical of pre-digital era, parents see it as "recovery". The kids finally behave the way parents think they should. I see it rather as a proof that the kids were ok in the first place. All that has changed is that (1) kids live up to parental expectations and (2) parental worries are no longer a source of conflict. When the kid on the electronic fast returns to playing Lego, it is not because of a "brain reset" or "recovery". It is just a natural way of fulfilling the need for new learning. The best rule of thumb for superior learning choices is the [Fundamental law of learning](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Fundamental_law_of_learning "Fundamental law of learning"), not parental micromanagement.

The sad part of the blog quoted by Dunckley was that a loving mom had to struggle with internal conflict, was made to lie to her own kids, and deprived them of educational opportunities. All that was a result of Dunckley's book. The mom might have been the source of original trouble in the household because of being unhappy with the use of tablets. The mom was in the end grateful to Dunckley while her kids can only watch their peers enjoy their lives to the fullest.

As the electronic fast was progressing well, there was a hiccup:

> **Electronic Fast Day 10**: I Should Have Known Better. Today we went to friend’s house where they played the X-Box for 3 hours. My 6-year old had a complete meltdown when we left. Not able to regulate. He started pushing and hitting me. *“I don’t want to go! Just 5 more minutes!”*. This brings back memories. I take it as a welcome reminder. A gift

Grateful mom and Dunckley have a clear interpretation. X-Box can cause a meltdown. I see it differently. The kids remember the value of gaming. After a long fast, their sensitivity and appreciation increases. Mom's intervention in ruling their own lives is the real cause of the meltdown. Few humans would have a stoic reaction to being dragged away from a delicious dinner or from a gripping movie in the movie theater. We do not blame dinners or movies. We blame the interrupters.

The story ending is really sad and poignant:

> **Electronic Fast Day 21:** The boys ask us about getting their iPads back. It’s been weeks. My husband and I talk about a **plan for letting them know they aren’t coming back**. We grab Dr. Dunckley’s book and search for advice on what to say. We formulate a plan and ask the boys to come into my husband’s office. We tell them that we sold the iPads. That doctors are finding out **tablets can be dangerous for growing brains and bodies**. That we didn’t know all of this when we bought them. We tell them that it’s not a punishment. That we will help them when they feel bored and we have lots of activities planned. Our 6-year old barely notices the conversation. **Our 8-year old got angry. And then sad. Very. Sad**. I would even say a bit depressed. I held him and let him know that we love him and care about his well being

All the unnecessary pain, anger, conflict, lies and depression because of a misleading book! Those kids should get their iPads back with an apology.

## Mom wisdom

I never stop being surprised how mom wisdom can beat the best of science. Parenting experts, neuroscientists, psychiatrists or educators often speak in one voice only to be contradicted by a smart mom's heart. Moms who act on instinct and watch their kids carefully will often deploy the most powerful weapon of rational parenting: love. It does not matter how much the theory disagrees with her instinct, or how much the rational brain tells her to do otherwise. When a mom is watchful and loving, she is far less likely to do harm. This is also a characteristic of many great teachers at early ages, i.e. those who are less pressured by the [curriculum](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Curriculum "Curriculum") and can better capitalize on the power of a child's brain uninjured by years of [schooling](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Schooling "Schooling").

Dunckley is not the first expert who admits to having battled with parental instincts. Moms make claims on their child's needs, but the expert evokes a theory and overrules the heart.

Dunckley's career shoot up unexpectedly after she made an innocuous comment under an blog entry written by Cris Rowan in the Huffington Post. The blog article spoke of [banning smartphones for children](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/10-reasons-why-handheld-devices-should-be-banned_b_4899218). Rowan is herself a great proponent of digital fasting. Her intent is good: more love, more hugging, more exercise, etc. However, her post is on the par with Spitzer's and Dunckley's mambo-neuro-jumbo in terms of scientific coherence. In response, one mom reacted decisively, and her post makes more sense that all the experts with all their tainted degrees: [10 reason why I will continue to give my children handheld devices](https://chopwoodcarrywater.blog/2014/03/11/10-reasons-why-i-will-continue-to-give-my-children-handheld-devices).

## Further reading

There is a huge demand for knowledge about parenting. Modern parents are often highly engaged in their children's future. They dream and plan well ahead of time. However, all this good intent will often inflict a great deal of harm if it is not backed up with some basic understanding of how the brain works. Freedom of choices is one of the most essential components of effective education. Instead of being free, children are micromanaged. Their days are often planned well ahead of time with no room for own initiative, passions and preferences. Children attend music schools or engage in sports without making their own decisions. Instead of becoming great musicians, artists or sportsmen, they are stressed, overworked, and unhappy. Their development and mental health suffers. Unfortunately, there is a whole army of gurus who tell parents how to optimally plan the lives of their children. The mythology of that quack army needs to be exposed. Children need to be free to make their own choices. For best libraries of texts about freedom in learning see [Peter Gray](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Peter_Gray "Peter Gray") or [Alfie Kohn](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Alfie_Kohn "Alfie Kohn").

For more see:

- [The morbid myth of Digital Dementia](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/The_morbid_myth_of_Digital_Dementia "The morbid myth of Digital Dementia")
- [Do not listen to Teru Clavel. Save the childhood](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Do_not_listen_to_Teru_Clavel._Save_the_childhood "Do not listen to Teru Clavel. Save the childhood")
- [Optimization of behavioral spaces in development](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Optimization_of_behavioral_spaces_in_development "Optimization of behavioral spaces in development")
- [Angela Duckworth is wrong about grit](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Angela_Duckworth_is_wrong_about_grit "Angela Duckworth is wrong about grit")
- [Direct instruction blocks pathways to great discoveries](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Direct_instruction_blocks_pathways_to_great_discoveries "Direct instruction blocks pathways to great discoveries")
- [Education counteracts evolution](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Education_counteracts_evolution "Education counteracts evolution")
- [Horrible theory of minimal guidance learning by Kirschner, Clark, and Sweller](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Horrible_theory_of_minimal_guidance_learning_by_Kirschner,_Clark,_and_Sweller "Horrible theory of minimal guidance learning by Kirschner, Clark, and Sweller")

  

---

For more texts on memory, learning, sleep, creativity, and problem solving, see **[Super Memory Guru](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/SuperMemo_Guru "SuperMemo Guru")**
