This text is part of: " *[Problem of Schooling](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Problem_of_Schooling "Problem of Schooling")* " by [Piotr Wozniak](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Piotr_Wozniak "Piotr Wozniak") (2017-2026)

## The effect of coercive schooling

Schools are a major contributor to the epidemic of obesity. Coercive schooling generates [learned helplessness](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Learned_helplessness "Learned helplessness"), which leads to depression, addictions, and more. By depriving students of the ability to enjoy life, schools contribute to life, in which sensitivity to all minor pleasures may become amplified. If secondary pleasures serve as comfort, they may form the basis of addiction.

The solution to the problem is to **take away the coercion**. However, schools came up with a solution that is the exact opposite: **more coercion**. In hope of burning more calories, and with an intent of developing "good habits", schools introduce compulsory physical education (PE). Sadly, compulsory PE has often the opposite effect to the one desired. In weight loss, exercise is of little value in terms of calories burnt. Coerced exercise is more likely to condition bad habits and the overall dislike of exercise in general.

Schools make kids fat, and PE often makes it worse

## Natural need to move

The need to move is natural in little children (see: *" [Born to move](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/what-body-knows/201611/are-humans-born-move) "*). It is as natural as the [need to learn](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Learn_drive "Learn drive"). Voracious toddlers released in the woods tend to explore, run and learn. Once freedom is limited, both natural needs shrivel. Kids stop being interesting in learning. They become lethargic and disinterested in physical activity. They lose their primary exploratory capabilities. Released in the woods, they may turn out unhappy for the absence of their little comforts such as a smartphone on a cozy sofa.

When I tell teachers that schools destroy the natural need for exercise, I hear that kids often arrive at school obese already. This only means that the effects of modern lifestyle, and the limits on freedom take their toll earlier, e.g. in the kindergarten or even in the family home.

Limits on freedom destroy the natural need for exercise

## Homeostatic control of weight and mobility

The weight of a human or an animal is determined by a setpoint which is a resultant of homeostatic mechanisms implemented in the brain as the **[appestat](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Appestat "Appestat")**. In simplest terms, those control systems maximize well-being determined by the levels of fat, nutritional needs, muscular adaptations, bone shape, tendon strength, etc. However, once rewards of freedom are taken away, compensatory mechanisms kick in, and the power of secondary rewards becomes amplified. In an extreme case, addictions develop. Those mechanisms are involved in nutrition as well. In an unhappy person, foods acts as comfort. This shifts the [appestat](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Appestat "Appestat") setpoint.

Homeostatic mechanisms are also involved in the control of the need for mobility and for procedural learning. These are also interfered with in modern lifestyle. At school, main contributors to fatigue are [sleep deficits](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Sleep_deficit "Sleep deficit"), and school [stress](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Stress "Stress"). Those are efficient counter vectors to the need for exercise. In addition, school often covers the entire day of a diligent kid. This leaves no room for exercise due to lack of time. A kid who does not exercise loses her skills associated with the benefits of exercise. A kid who does not play football loses his ability to play football. A kid who does not run may lose the ability to enjoy running. A tired kid is unable to enjoy exercise and becomes conditioned to move less.

If setpoint of nutritional homeostasis is shifted, e.g. as a result of the damage to control systems via coercion, all forms of dieting will result in a never-ending cycle of struggle. A person with setpoint shifted towards higher weight got two extreme choices: (1) dieting combined with endless suffering of self-denial, or (2) freedom combined with weight gain and obesity. Both may contribute to a further shift in the setpoint. In many cases, the yo-yo effect enters the picture. In yo-yo, periods of dieting and successful weight loss are followed by an inevitable weight gain. This process can last a lifetime and result in countless hours of lost productivity. Life of a yo-yo dieter is rarely a happy life. The prognosis is usually grim. It rarely gets better. The appestat control is progressing towards mayhem. Permanent and successful dieters are always proud of their achievements; however, they need to expend resources and attention on staying fit. A mere sight of chocolate candy can bring immense cravings. Obese people are unhappy for many obvious reasons. Most of all, it is difficult to achieve a healthy self-image and high self-esteem. Low self-esteem feeds back into obesity via [reward deprivation](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Reward_deprivation "Reward deprivation"). Most of those who are more fortunate in their weight control will inevitably generate social pressure via messages that generate a sense of guilt. Yo-yo dieters might be most miserable. From incredible highs of success, they plunge into double despair of a lightning-fast failure of massive weight gain.

Once the appetite control systems are injured, it is very hard to recover. It may take years of reconditioning and healing. However, the formula is simple: one must return to a complete harmony of self-agreement. Self-denial and [self-discipline](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Self-discipline "Self-discipline") are primary causes of control system failure (see: [War of the networks](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/War_of_the_networks "War of the networks")). Complete harmony is achievable by utmost attention to one's own needs, and the defense against the onslaught of modern lifestyle. Countless forms of coercion and social pressure surround us. It is school that makes us most vulnerable. At school we are conditioned to obey and submit to the wishes of others. In addition, we learn to submit to one's own [well-schooled](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Well-schooled "Well-schooled") auto-coercion.

Unhappiness blunts the rewards of exercise, and amplifies the rewards of eating

## The Error of Physical Education

Scheduling PE at school is usually absurdly irrational. The absurdity meets no teacher's empathy due to the immense societal ignorance of sports physiology. To find your own empathy, imagine being woken up at 4 am to run a marathon without preparation! Or imagine waiting late till your own 5 am boxing fight? If this is unconvincing, try eating a big pile of dripping-fat porker for breakfast? Or eating it right before sleep? If you hate veggies, make your nightmarish mix as your morning welcome to the day. I presume everyone can find some sport or meal that is unacceptable in its composition at a specific time. This is what kids often feel at PE. They hate it, or the hate it at specific time, or with a specific group of people, or hate it in a specific context (e.g. due to clothing, due to classes that follow, due to weather, etc.).

By ignoring student needs, Physical Education often leads to conditioning the hate of exercise

**I love exercise, yet I hated exercise at school**. If I did not exercise outdoors on a given day, I would feel like dying slowly. However, all that love and "addiction" depend on the timing and on specific forms of exercise. I love my annual ultramarathon (proudly completed yesterday as I write these words). However, to run it in July, I need to gradually increase loads starting with March. If I was to run 5 km withoout preparation, e.g. in my winter football season, I would collapse like most of the less exercised population. Different muscles are at work in different sports. Different tendons and joints need fortification. Similarly, if I was to play football tomorrow, I would sure suffer some injury. This shows that my love (or hate) for running, or football depend on the season. Similarly, I cannot exercise early in the morning when I seem to feel my age. Nor can I exercise late in the evening when I start being lethargic and my motivation plummets to the levels of pupils during a PE class. I am very sensitive to temperatures. In football, I perform best between 0 C and 10 C. The fun is gone in streams of sweat or on bone-breaking ice. Kids at PE have no choice. Barefoot running seems to make my feet resemble horse's hooves. However, just a few kilometers in shoes would paradoxically result in blistering. Shoe runners will experience the same when they switch to barefoot. As I fast during the first 7-8 hours of the day, I never suffer from sport stiches (ETAP: exercise-related transient abdominal pain). One minor meal would probably make me bend over while running. Kids have no choice. They cannot optimize. They need to exercise and suffer against all those rules

PE is one of the main reasons [children like to go to school](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Why_children_like_school%3F "Why children like school) (reason #1 is meeting friends). However, for many kids, it is also the number one reason for hating school. To maximize happiness and positive outcomes, we need to make PE voluntary as much as the entire school system.

Physical education might work if it is entirely voluntary

  

---

For more texts on memory, learning, sleep, creativity, and problem solving, see **[Super Memory Guru](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/SuperMemo_Guru "SuperMemo Guru")**
