An abstract for the [Congress of Homeschooling and Alternative Education](https://www.pafere.org/2023/07/21/artykuly/zapowiedz-kongres-edukacji-domowej-i-alternatywnej) (Sep 9, 2023, Poland)  
Author: [Piotr Wozniak](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Piotr_Wozniak "Piotr Wozniak")

- in 2013, in *"Causal entropic principle"*, Alexander Wissner-Gross explained how intelligence emerges in regions of spacetime characterized by maximum production of entropy. This confirms our ageless intuition that **intelligence is an unstoppable force of physics**. Intelligence is not just a thing we desire. Intelligence is not just a thing we may oppose or harness. It is a powerful vector pointing into the future.
- in the lingo of computer science, the quintessence of intelligence is to strive at maximizing accessible future game states. **Intelligence seeks opening maximum options of action** in the future.
- the brain is an intelligence machine. It is not just intelligent. It seeks maximization of intelligence. It acts in the interest of self and in the interest of collective intelligence.
- **the mechanism for maximizing brain's intelligence is implemented via adaptation guarded by maximization of [learntropy](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Learntropy "Learntropy") on input**. [Learntropy](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Learntropy "Learntropy") is the reflection of the entropy of the signal in the context of the present state of knowledge stored in the brain. Through the mechanisms of the [learn drive](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Learn_drive "Learn drive") (the core instinct that underlies adaptive learning), the brain can assess the learntropy of a channel by an incessant evaluation of the quality of the input signal in the light of goals and needs. In simple terms, **the brain knows that it needs to get smarter**!
- the purpose of the school system is to transfer knowledge to student's brain. This process is highly inefficient, however, it used to be plausible in the 18-19 centuries due to low learntropy of the environment. These days, the learntropy of a child's environment is highest in the history of mankind. It keeps increasing. This makes the learntropy of the school channel very low in comparison. As a result, schools resort to various forms of coercion. Schools use penalties and rewards to coax a child to comply with the procedure.
- if a child is coerced or coaxed into abandoning the channels of high learntropy, (s)he needs to suppress the [knowledge valuation](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Knowledge_valuation "Knowledge valuation") signal. **The brain needs to learn to ignore the reward that comes with knowledge**. This form of conditioning has tragic consequences. On one hand, it undermines the [learn drive](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Learn_drive "Learn drive") (children lose their love of learning). On the other, it deprives the brain of the prime source of rewards. This results in the increase in depression, addictions and suicide.
- the remedy to the problem is to rethink the optimization criteria in education. **Instead of evaluating students on tests, we need to maximize their satisfaction from learning** (see: [Pleasure of learning](https://supermemo.guru/wiki/Pleasure_of_learning "Pleasure of learning") for details). The satisfaction criterion does not even need to be measured. Freedom of choice will ensure that the brain will seek maximum learntropy. It will choose the right school, the right people, the right tools, and the right areas of interest. We can replace tests with passion. We only need to replace coercion with freedom.

Today's schooling wastefully combats the laws of physics. Tomorrow's education will maximize the effects of learning through the joy of free choice
